---
layout: post
title: Fuzzy DNS
summary : "For some reason, I thought it might be a good idea to tolerate typos in subdomain names. I added this idea to my Google keep's idea pool, left it there and forgot about it. Few weeks later, fuzzy-dns was born. A simple fuzzy domain name server."
description : "What I learnt building a simple fuzzy domain name server."
date: '2016-06-14T17:00:00+0200'
author: Mohamed Bassem
image:
tags:
  - golang
  - dns
  - fuzzy
categories :
---

For some reason, I thought it might be a good idea to tolerate typos in subdomain names. I added this idea to my Google keep's idea pool, left it there and forgot about it. I searched for already built DNS servers in Go to fork and extend but I didn't find one. So the main reason it stayed in the idea pool for that long, was the burden of implementing a DNS server. Until I stumbled upon [this](https://github.com/mdp/PlaneBoard) yesterday. I read the code and found that it's not that hard to implement a minimal DNS server. So out of boredom, I finally took it out of the idea pool and [fuzzy-dns](https://github.com/MohamedBassem/fuzzy-dns) was born. The README file describes the technical details.

The main reason I'm writing this post is the "Today I Learned" part. The first challenge was, how I am going to store the records configuration of the server. First thought was a [Zone File](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zone_file). The `dns` package has a parser for zone files so it seemed like a good idea. I read its wikipedia page, but I found that it would be complicated for users to maintain. So I decided to go with a simple YAML array in the server's config file.

I knew about the DNS record types (A, AAAA, CNAME, ...). I used them to configure my own domains, but I've never built a DNS server before. I don't know how the records are served. This was the second challenge. One question I had was "how are CNAME records served?". Browsers, for instance, query only for the A record. So I started wireshark, filtered for DNS packets and started capturing. I found that although an A record is requested, sometimes CNAME records are returned. I started a terminal and decided to test it myself on my own subdomains to understand.

{% highlight bash %}
$ dig +noall +answer A blog.mbassem.com


blog.mbassem.com.       1799    IN      CNAME   mohamedbassem.github.io.
mohamedbassem.github.io. 3599   IN      CNAME   github.map.fastly.net.
github.map.fastly.net.  7       IN      A       23.235.43.133
{% endhighlight %}

Although I'm asking for an `A` record. I got some `CNAME` records in the response. After some digging in RFC 1034 I found:

> "CNAME RRs cause special action in DNS software.  When a name server
> fails to find a desired RR in the resource set associated with the
> domain name, it checks to see if the resource set consists of a CNAME
> record with a matching class.  If so, the name server includes the CNAME
> record in the response and restarts the query at the domain name
> specified in the data field of the CNAME record.  The one exception to
> this rule is that queries which match the CNAME type are not restarted."

That's how the first question was answered. The second question was what if there are a CNAME and an A records for the same subdomain? The answer was in the [wiki page of CNAME records](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CNAME_record).

>An alias defined in a CNAME record must have no other resource records of other types (MX, A, etc.).

Those were the two main questions I had. I implemented the server, deployed it to a DigitalOcean droplet, changed my GoDadday's DNS records to give it a try and it worked.

Is it useful? I don't know. I just thought that it's an experiment that's worth trying.

If you have any other ideas, comments or questions, please share them with me in the comments.
